visualization
=============

Scripts for making pictures.
- `sexp-to-tab.rkt` create a `.tab` file from a `.rktd` file.
- `grouping.py` create a histogram of runtimes
- `shortest-path.py` summarize paths in the lattice

sexp-to-tab.rkt
---------------

Usage: `sexp-to-tab.rkt FILE.rktd`

Converts a vector s-expression (i.e., the output of the `run.rkt` script) into the .tab file format.
In the output, data for each configuration is on a new line.


grouping.py
-----------

Usage: `grouping.py FILE.tab`

Creates a histogram from the runtimes in `FILE.tab`.
Histogram bins are spaced evenly between the minimum and maximum runtimes of any configuration.
The number of BINS is hard-coded near the bottom of the file.


shortest-path.py
----------------

Usage: `shortest-path.py FILE.tab`

Creates the module lattice from the data in `FILE.tab`.
First prints the shortest path (by SUM) from the fully-untyped configuration up to the typed configuration.
Next creates histograms of all paths from untyped to typed.
The histograms are partitioned as in `grouping.py`, but weights are computed using a hard-coded measure.
The number of bins is hard-coded near the bottom of the file.

The measures we currently use are:
- SUM: a path's weight is the sum of its edges' weights
- MAX: a path's weight is the maximum of its edges' weights
- MIN: like MAX, but using minumum weight

module-graph.py
---------------

Usage: `module-graph.py FILE.graph`

Creates the module dependence graph from the specification in `FILE.graph`.

TODO make sure is accurate with final product
The script expects its input to be a tab-separated file with columns:
    MODULE	INDEX	REQUIRES
The first column should be filenames, like `main.rkt`.
The second column should be an integer index, indicating this file's position in the configuration bitstrings generated by the benchmarking script.
For example, a configuration with one typed module might be marked by the string "0010".
In this case the module with index 2 is the only typed module (marked with a "1").
The last column should be a comma-separated list of filenames.
These should be the files that `MODULE` requires, and are used to draw directed edges in the graph.

After creating the graph, the script draws a few pictures:
- TODO 
